Feature/785 documentation metadata (#806)
eclipse/ditto: documentation/src/main/resources/pages/ditto/basic-metadata.md

---
title: Metadata Support
keywords: metadata, things
tags: [model]
permalink: basic-metadata.html
---

Besides [features](basic-feature.html) a Thing in Ditto is also able to store Metadata information. 

> These informations can be additional information for describing specific features or properties of the thing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These information can be additional information for describing specific features or properties of the thing.
```

A very simple example is the timestamp when the current value of the feature or property was set.

> Metadata can be manipulated by using the `metadata` header, see [here](protocol-specification.html#headers) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metadata can be manipulated by using the `put-metadata` header, see [here](protocol-specification.html#headers) for more information.
```

## Predefined Metadata 

Currently, there are no pre-defined Metadata keys.

> <!--
> Right now, the only fixed pre-defined Metadata key is `issuedAt`.
> 
> ### The `issuedAt` Metadata key
>  
> The Metadata key `issuedAt` describes the timestamp when the current value of a feature property was _recorded_ (_not when it was set_).
> This means, that a client _can_ send this value by using the `metadata` header. If the client does not send
> this header the `issuedAt` field will be set by Ditto with the timestamp when the value was written.
> -->
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Setting custom Metadata

The only way to set arbitrary `Metadata` is by using the `put-metadata` header, see [here](protocol-specification.html#headers) for more information.

> The Format of the Json Array is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The format of the JSON array is 
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json
```

[
  {
    "key":"/features/lamp/properties/color/r",
    "value":{"issuedAt":someTimestamp,"issuedBy":{"name":"me","mail":"me@mail.com"}}
  },
  {
    "key":"*/foo",
    "value": "bar"
  },
  ...
]
```

where `key` describes the hierarchical position in the Thing where the metadata is placed and 
`value` is a map of Metadata keys to their respective values.

> A special Syntax for the key is `*/{key}` which means that all affected Json Leafs of the Modify Operation will
> get the Metadata Key `{key}` with the given value. So if, for example, only the affected Json Leafes should 
> get the timestamp where the changed values were recorded, one would set the `metadata` header as shown in the
> following example: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A special syntax for the key is `*/{key}` which means that all affected JSON leafs of the modify operation will
get the Metadata key `{key}` with the given value. So if, for example, only the affected JSON leafs should 
get the timestamp where the changed values were recorded, one would set the `put-metadata` header as shown in the following example: 
```

```json
[
  {
    "key":"*/timestamp",
    "value": someTimestamp
  }
]
```

## Reading Metadata Information

> Currently, the only way to retrieve stored Metadata is by a full thing query, e.g. via the [HTTP API](http-api-doc.html).
> But, `_metadata` has to be added to the queried fields together with `thingId,attributes,_metadata`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently the only way to retrieve stored Metadata is by querying a full thing, e.g. via the [HTTP API](http-api-doc.html), and specifying an (additional) [field selector](httpapi-concepts.html#with-field-selector) `_metadata`, e.g.: `?fields=thingId,attributes,_metadata`.
```

> For example a `GET` request to `https://{ditto-instance}/api/2/things/{namespace}:{thing}?fields=thingId,attributes,_metadata`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example a `GET` request to `https://{ditto-instance}/api/2/things/{namespace}:{name}?fields=thingId,policyId,features,_created,_modified,_revision,_metadata`
```

These informations can be additional information for describing specific features or properties of the thing.
A very simple example is the timestamp when the current value of the feature or property was set.

Metadata can be manipulated by using the `metadata` header, see [here](protocol-specification.html#headers) for more information.

## Predefined Metadata 

Currently, there are no pre-defined Metadata keys.

<!--
Right now, the only fixed pre-defined Metadata key is `issuedAt`.

### The `issuedAt` Metadata key
 
The Metadata key `issuedAt` describes the timestamp when the current value of a feature property was _recorded_ (_not when it was set_).
This means, that a client _can_ send this value by using the `metadata` header. If the client does not send
this header the `issuedAt` field will be set by Ditto with the timestamp when the value was written.
-->

## Setting custom Metadata

The only way to set arbitrary `Metadata` is by using the `put-metadata` header, see [here](protocol-specification.html#headers) for more information.
The Format of the Json Array is 

```
[
  {
    "key":"/features/lamp/properties/color/r",

>     "value":{"issuedAt":someTimestamp,"issuedBy":{"name":"me","mail":"me@mail.com"}}

Reviewer 2: Is that really possible? According to https://github.com/eclipse/ditto/issues/785#issuecomment-688062943 I'd assume that each metadata should receive it's own array entry?

Author: Hey, I'm refering to https://github.com/eclipse/ditto/issues/680#issuecomment-675446480 here. I think I tested it but have to retest it to be sure.

Reviewer: should be, yes - you set an JsonObject for the `"/features/lamp/properties/color/r"` property.

  },
  {
    "key":"*/foo",
    "value": "bar"
  },
  ...
]
```

where `key` describes the hierarchical position in the Thing where the metadata is placed and 
`value` is a map of Metadata keys to their respective values.

A special Syntax for the key is `*/{key}` which means that all affected Json Leafs of the Modify Operation will
get the Metadata Key `{key}` with the given value. So if, for example, only the affected Json Leafes should 
get the timestamp where the changed values were recorded, one would set the `metadata` header as shown in the
following example: 

```json
[
  {
    "key":"*/timestamp",
    "value": someTimestamp
  }
]
```

## Reading Metadata Information

Currently, the only way to retrieve stored Metadata is by a full thing query, e.g. via the [HTTP API](http-api-doc.html).

> But, `get-metadata` has to be added to the queried fields together with `thingId,attributes,_metadata`.

Reviewer 2: What's that about `get-metadata`? Also this sentence seems to be incomplete

Reviewer: get-metadata is not yet implemented and not required to be set currently

Author: sorry, indeed. Typo.

For example a `GET` request to `https://{ditto-instance}/api/2/things/{namespace}:{thing}?fields=thingId,attributes,_metadata`
will yield the Metadata stored for the given Thing, in the following format:

```json
{
    "thingId": ...,
    "attributes": {
        ...
    },
    "_metadata": {

>         ...

Reviewer 2: I'd use a full example here so a user may see the whole thing in action like this (from https://github.com/eclipse/ditto/issues/778#issue-687274224):

```json
{
  "thingId": "org.eclipse.ditto:thing-1",
  "policyId": "...",
  "features": {
    "lamp": {
      "properties": {
        "on": true,
        "color": {
          "r": 0,
          "g": 255,          
          "b": 255,
        }
      }
    }
  },
  "_created": "2020-06-01T10:00:00Z",
  "_modified": "2020-06-09T14:30:00Z",
  "_revision": 42,
  "_metadata": {
    "features": {
      "lamp": {
        "properties": {
          "on": {
            "issuedAt": "2020-06-09T14:30:00Z"
          },
          "color": {
            "r": {
              "issuedAt": "2020-06-09T14:15:00Z"
            },
            "g": {
              "issuedAt": "2020-06-09T14:15:00Z"
            },
            "b": {
              "issuedAt": "2020-06-09T14:15:00Z"
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Author: thanks, I will add that : )
